Verne apparently dislikes all theories of evolution, for mainly human- istic but still partly religious reasons. But this is not the essential point: he
raises  questions,  provides  ambiguous  signs,  and  then  plays  Axel  off
against Lidenbrock, modern science against old-fashioned natural philos- ophy. Ultimately he argues in this book that any overall conception can be destroyed by a single new find. It is things that count, not theories.
If the Journey itself leaves any certainties, they may not last. Probably at about this time, Verne wrote ‘Humbug’, in which a giant human skele-
ton is dug up in the United States, thus radically transforming evolution-
ary theories—but is then shown to be a hoax. Another short story, ‘The Eternal Adam’ (1910), suggests that civilisations inevitably expand and then go into terminal decline, so that any number have perhaps lived and died. Consequently man may have simply ‘evolved’ from his own degen- erate forefathers—he may always have existed. But then again, what the story shows, as distinct from tells, is perhaps the opposite, that humanity may transmit wisdom down through the generations, so that it is not nec- essarily stuck in an eternal cycle after all. But in any case most or all of the story was written by Michel Verne. On the other hand, his ideas were very much drawn from his father’s. . .
One should not, therefore, seek positive views on evolution in the
Journeys. The attention paid to the question covers up gaps in knowledge rather than fills them in. Our interest, over a century on, lies more in how it is done than in the answers to the questions themselves.
One method Verne uses to sustain interest is to set Lidenbrock’s eru- dition against Axel’s naïveté and ignorance, providing a role-model for the
reader. Dialogue is often employed, with Axel’s simple questions some-
times, however, not having simple answers, thus allowing him to con- found his uncle. Verne popularises knowledge by means of models and
comparisons, with frequent appeals to instinct and common sense. The personality clashes of the scholarly world, and particularly the drives of the individual scholars, further reduce the abstraction. In accordance with contemporary usage—and that of the eighteenth century, which often models Verne’s conceptions—a relatively homely language is used, of
‘elastic’, ‘cracks’, ‘bones’, or ‘monsters’—with, however, learned words like ‘Japhetic’, ‘Devonian’, or ‘subliming’ thrown in for effect.
One apparently scientific example central to the novel is the time–
space equivalence: by going down into the Earth, the heroes go back through the layers of past time. They leave the nineteenth century, pass
through the successive geological ages, and become ‘prehistoric’ or ‘fos-
silised’. Even the adverbs like ‘soon’ or ‘after a while’ play the game. The result is phrases like ‘Creation had made obvious progress since the day before’: in other words, Verne is playing on the reversing of time and the absurdity of interpreting Genesis literally. This time–space equivalence is, once again, a literary device: the plot and the narrative voice structure the science, rather than the other way round.
Another learned-looking device in the Journey is the large number of figures. Quite often they are erroneous—although not as frequently as the
foreign words. Again, lists are frequently in evidence. Mostly composed of
nouns, they incorporate material from varied sources, although Verne in- variably adapts them to his own ends. The style is emphasised as much as the content, by means of careful selection, by placing in context, by emphasising the immediate and dramatic features; but above all by using euphony, alliteration, analogy, and metaphorisation.
