Science thus becomes consistently subordinate to wider conceptions. Any body of organised knowledge is ultimately for Verne just a sub-genre
of creative writing: the only all-embracing discourse that he allows. A few
of the early reviewers misread Verne and assumed he was a scientist—but the more perceptive emphasised the plausibility and the quality of the writing. His science and knowledge are really just a vehicle for highly per- sonal conceptions of the world. As a literary endeavour, the work contains human truth: it examines all conventional wisdoms, producing more prob- lems than solutions. It is made up of myths, metaphors and a fair amount of mayhem.
Most of the ideas are mediated via the characters. Although the char- acterisation is hardly conventional, it is quite varied. The verbal and other foibles  of  the  contrasting  but  complementary  couple  Lidenbrock–Axel make for a more complex relationship than many in Verne’s works. Both employ the full resources of plays on words, repartee, interchange of po- sition, understatement or exaggeration, and the taking of logical positions to absurd extremes.
The opening description of Lidenbrock in terms of his tics and eccen- tricities reveals the volcanic forces within him. He is an obsessive, a driv-
en man, so much in a hurry that he crams double helpings into his mouth
and pulls at plants and pushes at trains to make them go faster. The line- ar drive of his watchword ‘Forward!’ compels him on and then down, re-
fusing all deviations or retreats, making him into ‘the man of the perpen- diculars’. Not that the portrait is entirely unsympathetic: the professor’s heart is in the right place, if slightly difficult to find. He is energetic, cou- rageous, competent, knowledgeable, and bears no malice—he is simply a little excitable, absent-minded, and narrow-sighted.
We often view his nephew from the outside, from an ironical distance, for Axel-the-narrator knows things that Axel-the-character does not. He is at first passive, lacking in character. His main impulse is to stay at home with Gräuben, and his main virtues are scepticism and self-knowledge, those of an unimpassioned observer. From the beginning, however, he al- so embodies spontaneity and hence true discovery and creativity. With time, a role-reversal occurs and many of the professor’s characteristics and functions are transferred to him, including the passionate subjectivi- ty. He is thus initiated into the adult world, making the partnership more or less equal. It is significant that Lidenbrock writes relatively dry scien- tific works, but Axel, even if he writes at his uncle’s bidding, produces the more creative book that we end up holding in our hands.
Hans provides the perfect foil, governed by phlegm, rationality, cere- brality and efficiency. The main barrier to understanding him is that he
has no common language with Axel, so communication is virtually limited
to nouns. Although an admirable and generous person, he demonstrates few human feelings; and although highly ingenious, he is uncreative. As a northerner and a hunter (and therefore a destroyer, albeit a pacific one), he lacks that vital spark: even direct application of ball-lightning cannot bring this perfect being to life. In sum, he is one of Verne’s psychological limiting cases, an experiment in extremes. The great ancestor Sak- nussemm, in contrast, seems to embody many different traits: a north- erner but achieving more than the nineteenth-century heroes combined; a writer of sorts; a misunderstood genius; and the explorer who unfairly benefits from getting there first, destroying the patch for ever after.
Verne’s humour is applied to any pretention or artificiality in the char- acters, most simply by means of a juxtaposition with the hard facts—and with the hidden intentions of the person concerned. Networks of desire are thus revealed, particularly where the libido is involved. From the cor- respondence, we know that Verne had an unbridled sexual imagination. But since it cannot operate openly here, it is clothed in humour.
There is also a striking recurrent vocabulary of phrases like ‘instinc- tive’, ‘automatic’, and ‘without thinking’. Even though the noun itself ‘the
unconscious’ (‘l’inconscient’) does not seem to have been used before the
1890s, Verne is clearly demonstrating an awareness of the underlying concept. In the chapters added in 1867, he mentions a William Carpenter, an expert on dredging the ocean depths and author of Zoology. . . and Chief Forms of Fossil Remains (1857, reissued 1866) and The Uncon- scious Action of the Brain (1866–71). A man of such varied, and Vernian, interests may easily be the source of the innovative psychological termi- nology of the depths in the Journey.
Considerable energy is in fact both repressed and displayed by Axel and Lidenbrock—and by the author. The whole book is charged. Electricity acts as a convenient metaphor for sexual energy; horses have a field day; and hands play an important role throughout the book. So do reinforced staves, pens, knives, telescopes, trees, giant mushrooms, thick pillars, verticality in general, tubes, pockets, leather wallets, purses, and goat- skin bottles (‘outre’ from ‘uterus’). The Earth itself is a blatant sexual ob- ject, with a rich vocabulary to describe the twin firm white peaks, pointed waves seething with fire, mouths wide open, gaping orifices, cavities, bays, fjords, gashes, and slits; but also the thrusting (and blocking) of the most varied penetrations, glows, eruptions, effusions, and discharges, as well as repeated instances of falling and sinking.
But Verne’s originality may lie equally in his linking of these fixations with others: most bodily functions are also obsessively present in the
Earth’s bowels, including sweating, trembling, eating, digesting, eliminat-
ing of waste matter, and pregnancy and childbirth. The sex is only part of a general view of the world as a reflection of the observer’s own con- sciousness—and unconscious. Freud himself said that writers had most of the ideas before the scientists; whatever the truth of this, in the Journey we can certainly detect pre-Freudian views on the role of dreams and the libido in the subconscious mind.
