How does the Journey to the Centre of the Earth fit in with the literary movements of the period? The question has not really been answered to
date. One reason is the very variety of Verne’s production, extending over
seventy years, making him the contemporary of both Charlotte Brontë and James Joyce. Equally important, Verne is sui generis.
One influence on the Journeys is undoubtedly the contemporary thea- tre, Verne’s lifelong love. His attention to dialogue and care for timing and
suspense, especially in the ‘set scenes’ and the ending, doubtless derives from this. But the novel is also under the spell of the Romantic literary
movement. A brief list of features might include: a sense of melancholy, personal angst or existential doubt; a tendency to flee society and search
for consolation in nature; a ‘poetic’ use of language, particularly the use
of adjectives, the imperfect tense, and long sentences; a search for the transcendental or absolute, values outside ‘this world’; a fixation on time and the transitory nature of existence, producing an obsession with decay and death; and a retreat into the past, a search for the origins of the indi- vidual and the species. The sum of these tendencies means that the Jour- ney cannot be excluded from the general orbit of late Romanticism.
But Verne is simultaneously a Realist. The Journey encompasses scep- ticism and reductionism, but also shares with Realism a preference for male characters (and virtues), a reluctance to indulge in unsubstantiated psychologism, a tendency to short, sharp, sometimes verbless sentences. The paradox, though, is that so much Realism in the externals leads to the opposite of realism in the mood: Verne’s positivistic aspects culminate in the wildest longings and imaginings. The short sentences then highlight the long ones; the nouns, the adjectives. Opposites not only attract in
Verne, but produce a pole-reversal, an inversion of signs—as most of the conditions of surface existence are inverted underground. The Journey proves that the most down-to-earth Realism can, despite the labels in the histories of literature, lead to the most high-blown Romanticism.
In a chronological course on literature, Journey to the Centre of the
Earth falls between Stendhal’s Charterhouse of Parma and Flaubert’s Sen- timental Education, between Dickens and Disraeli—and yet somehow ap- pears more modern than these works. To describe it, the most appropri- ate terms may be those associated with the twentieth century. Verne par- ticipates in the Modernist movement, if by Modernism we mean an obses- sion with speed, with machines, a de-humanisation and an abstraction. In purely literary terms, the Journey must be considered modern because of its anticipation of the twentieth century’s use of self-awareness or ‘self- consciousness’ at all levels: the creation of self-reflecting structures, de- vices turned back on themselves, symbols that symbolise their own exist- ence, a text that exposes itself, lays bare its own innards.
The word ‘Averni’, as one example, contains the letters v, e, r, n.
‘Might he not have inserted his name at some point in the manuscript?’ (ch. 3). The novel is generated by the personal anagram, not once but
repeatedly. Thus the text-within-the-text word-puzzle that starts every-
thing off is ‘à l’ENVERs’ (‘backwards’); the compass that determines all movements underground is ‘RENVErsée’ (‘reversed’); at the centre ap- pears a vast ‘caVERNE’; within it movements are governed by the helm (‘gouVERNail’); and the girl who at the centre of the quest is ‘ViRlaNdaisE’ (‘from Virland’). The author lays bare his building-blocks, which in turn refer to their own reversal of the letters constituting the novel. Verne plays hide-and-seek, blatantly concealing himself at the centre of his text.
Another example of the textual self-reference is the change of narra- tion in chapters 32–5, where Axel’s ‘ship’s log’ replaces the after-the-
event narration. One of the functions of this ‘journal’ is to transcribe indi-
cations of time and weather, and so to convey the monotony of a sea- journey, where there is no landscape to observe (a paradox in the interior of the Earth). Another is to add to the suspense, for by definition the nar- rator–character cannot know what is going to happen. The ‘ship’s log’ also enables convenient gaps to be inserted in the story when Axel remains unconscious. But it is above all a stylistic experiment.
Axel’s narration is in the present tense: despite appearances, howev- er, it is not really a ‘logbook’, ‘journal’, or ‘diary’, but a complex narration.
