In fact Axel gives no general indication when he is writing, except the
contradictory ‘daily. . . as it were at the dictation of events’ (ch. 32). French commentators have assumed that the events are meant to be transcribed instantaneously—and so have argued that writing notes in a darkening storm is implausible. In fact the lengthy dream and the ex- tended conversations can much less easily have been written down at the time. But in any case Axel sometimes self-referentially reports his own writing, whether of a note to Hans or of his own ‘ship’s log’—and the writ- ing must precede the writing of the writing! The present tense, then, is
very far from indicating either an authentic diary or a simultaneity of events and narration.
One consequence is on the description of the sea monsters. By using the present tense, the problem of whether we are in past or present time
is avoided. The nineteenth century has become authentically prehistoric.
There are also further surprising consequences on notions of self- reference and intentionality. Thus in the traditional mode of narration there is a distinction between ‘j’allais’ (‘I was going to’) and ‘j’allai’ (‘I moved to. . .’), between subjective intention and objective action. But in Verne’s present, the two are collapsed down to ‘je vais’ (both ‘I am going to’ and ‘I move to. . .’). In sum, the pretence of a naive transcription can- not be sustained. There is a temporal distance between the events and the text. The transparency and self-referentiality of the present tense, the equivalence between doing and reporting, the short-circuiting of the nor- mal process of narration, are only apparent. There is a narrator lurking in the shadows. The keeper of the ‘log-book’ is just a character in his own story after all.
The reader who expects Journey to the Centre of the Earth to be sim- ple is therefore in for a surprise. The novel might be described as a virtu-
oso exercise in ‘eversion’: the complex topological process of turning a
body inside out. Things are not what they seem. Verne takes a perverse pleasure in creating as many trails as possible – and diversions to throw the pursuants off. It is almost as if he foresaw a scholarly edition of the Journey, with the full apparatus of introduction and endnotes attempting to explain what is going on. Not bad for a short-trousered writer without style or substance!
I would like to thank Angela Brown and Katy Randle for their help with the preparation of the manuscript.

Note on the Translation


The text used for the present edition is based on the 1867 one used in modern French editions (Livre de Poche, Garnier-Flammarion, Rencontre, Hachette). The first edition (18°) appeared on 25 November 1864, and was unillustrated. As was usual, the illustrations were added only for the first large-octavo edition (1867) (the seventh edition). But Journey to the Centre of the Earth is unique in that Verne used this opportunity to add a new section, chapters 37–39 (pp. xx–yy in the present text). What is also very unusual is that the novel was not published first in serial form (Het- zel only launched the Magasin d’Education et de Récréation in 1864).
The present translation is an entirely new one, benefiting from the most recent scholarship on Verne. It aims to be faithful to the original (in- cluding the absence of chapter titles and the retention of the mock-
learned footnotes). The use of phrases like ‘he said’ and ‘he replied’, of
exclamation marks and of semi-colons in ternary sentences has been slightly reduced.
In the early works Verne uses pre-Revolutionary measures like pieds,
lignes (1/12 of an inch), lieues and toises (‘fathoms’). Throughout this edition, British feet (about 7% smaller than the French ones), miles
