(about 10% larger) and so on will be used. A few of Verne’s figures have
consequently had to be slightly adjusted.
Foreign-language words and place-names are erratic in the Voyages extraordinaires, sometimes even internally inconsistent. These have nor-
mally been corrected (for instance ‘Snaefells’ for ‘Sneffels’). Some of
Verne’s scientific and other learned terms do not seem authentic, whether through error or deliberate mystification. In such cases an Anglicised equivalent is given, but usually an endnote indicates its absence from the dictionaries.
A recurrent problem in translating Verne is his delight in reactivating fixed expressions, by subtly altering them or by implying a literal mean-
ing. In such cases, the aim has been to retain the ambiguity or else find a
happy medium between the two possible senses.
In this edition, unlike previous translations, the present tense has been retained throughout the ‘logbook’ section (chaps. 32–5).

The Manuscript
A manuscript of Journey to the Centre of the Earth was revealed to exist in 1994.1 This amazing find is of unparalleled importance for Verne stud- ies. Our knowledge of the novel, previously limited to the 1864 and 1867 edition, has suddenly become multi-layered and shifting: almost as if the



1 I would like to record my thanks here for the generosity of the Heritage Book Shop of Los Angeles and the owner in allowing me exclusive access to part of the MS.
depths within the novel have opened up before our feet!2 Brief details of the variants in the manuscript are therefore revealed here for the first time.3
The printer’s marks show that this was the last manuscript stage. There are forty-three chapters, as in the 1864 edition, although chapter breaks are sometimes different. On the folios seen (1-32, 99-104, 131-
59, and 191-3), one can observe a large number of deletions and inser- tions, especially in the opening chapters. Some are stylistic, such as ‘he
had had the time to throw’, a ‘you see’ from the narrator, and the profes-
