sor’s ‘rhomboid’ window-panes. But ‘the pretty firland [sic] girl’ here lives on ‘Firlander-strasse’; and Sainte-Claire Deville is absent from the scien- tists who have visited Lidenbrock, with an unidentified ‘Banral(?)’ appear- ing instead. Axel above all comments on ‘Professor Lidenbrocks selfish- ness: ‘and provided he was enlightened, he couldn’t give a fig about en- lightening.’ The uncle is sarcastically called ‘monsieur’, he swears (‘Male- diction!’), and to interrupt Axel’s daydream, he strikes his shoulder
(1864: ‘the table’). His locking up of the starving Axel and Martha is clearer: ‘What key? The door key? No!’ Even his reaction to the cracking of the code is different: ‘His nervous system, like that of a top, was trem- bling with electricity. I would have been afraid to touch him. This went on for quite some time.’ A hint of homosexuality may appear in ‘M. Christen-
sen, consul in Hamburg and very close friend of the professor’s’—although the scurrilous ‘He lived with Martha the maid and me’ implies Martha
might be Axel’s mother! Even Lidenbrock’s house is sardonically ‘in the
centre of the most horrible part of Hamburg, unfortunately unharmed by the fire in 1842’.
The runic document is also quite different in the manuscript. Like Li- denbrock’s financially challenged Treatise, the Heimskringla is for the
moment modestly ‘octavo’; and a large number of details in the cryptic message are not the same. But the most interesting revelations are to do
with the object of Axel’s passion. She is ‘pale-skinned’, and ‘each day ar- rive[s] with flowers’. It is Gräuben who emerges after the professor’s en-
raged exit—and who, after Martha disappears, stays in the house alone
with Axel. What they do for sixteen lines (perhaps the same as during the
‘detours’ on the way home) is unfortunately deleted. But Axel’s message, when decoded, is guaranteed to shock Lidenbrock more: ‘Love me, my
pretty Gräuben, love me’—Axel had already admitted that ‘I was rather
frivolous’. And the response duly comes: ‘“What is this Gräuben doing xx,” asked my uncle for the second time’; to which Axel weakly but sur- prisingly replies: ‘It is some homework (?) from the Johannaeum.’ After the professor returns to the document, there follow three illegible lines, ending with a harsh and Hamlet-like ‘... abruptly his interminable solilo- quy’.


2 A complete publication of the MS would be a vital addition to the under- standing of Verne.
3 For reasons of space, a note on p. 231 provides information about the MS
version of the underground cavern.
Again, Axel tells Martha that they are going ‘to hell!’; the total number of active volcanoes remaining is only ‘about fifteen’; the temperature in- side the Earth is ‘two million degrees’; the expedition seems ‘the craziest
... of the 19th century’; Altona is a ‘town on the border with Denmark’; and, as they leave, Axel holds Gräuben in his arms, ‘under the somewhat tender gaze of my uncle’!
