The manuscript, in sum, is a unique tool for understanding the often invisible ‘fault-lines’ of the novel.

Note about the Underground Cavern in the Manuscript
Both the cavern and Lidenbrock are different in the MS, as are many of the dates. The variants include the idea that, compared to the cavern,
Guacharo [sic] and Mammoth caves are ‘simple grottoes, narrow cavities’;
the description of the Lidenbrock Sea as a mere ‘lake’, in ‘this subterrane- an land’; the world on the surface as the ‘globe’; and the notion that su- perman Hans may even have snatched a few hours’ sleep on the raft. Again, Axel’s reaction to the concept of the Earth as a vast hollow sphere containing two planets is a biting ‘Pure imagination! of a Briton’. And an important pseudo-learned footnote on fo. 142 reveals the source for the first living creatures found underground: ‘Professor Lidenbrock is here us- ing the classification proposed by Professor Agassiz for fossil fish, based
on the layout, nature, and form of the scales.’ Louis Agassiz (1807-73)
was a Swiss-American zoologist and geologist, the anti-Darwinian author of a five-vol. Research on Fossil Fish (1833-44) and four-vol. Contribu- tions to the Natural History of the United States (1857-62); his Voyage au Brésil (1868) inspired Verne’s The Giant Raft (1881).
The Sea is ‘cold but freshwater’, although this is then amended to
‘salt’; the prehistoric bones are conserved by ‘lime carbonate’; there ap- pears a rude remark that the prehistoric monsters ‘reproduced for a long
time’; and the megatherium ‘rummag[es] in the ground with its forward
members’, a brilliantly obscene remark calculated to enrage Hetzel. What is more, parts of the log-book are in the past tenses, in marked contrast with the published stylistic experiment of the present tense.
The bulk of the variants, however, are again to do with the professor. Axel suggests his uncle is teasing him; and repeatedly describes him as highly impatient. But when Lidenbrock is concerned about Axel’s illness,
he actually calls him ‘my nephew’ and Axel notes: ‘My uncle was consider- ing me attentively.’ In the MS, Lidenbrock allows his nephew to lead the
way into the giant mushroom forest—and they almost get lost for ever.
But he reverts to type whenever his impatience or worry returns. He laughs ‘nervously’; and often appears ridiculous through intemperate pre- dictions. Thus he argues that it is ‘not probable’ that living monsters sur- vive in the cavern; he estimates the size of the ocean to be ‘ten or fifteen leagues at the very most’; and concludes: ‘we are bound to find the oppo- site shores soon.’ He also prophesies that they will reach the centre: ‘I am certain to find new ways out that will lead us to our objective.’ Even his scientific reasoning seems faulty: ‘Six atmospheres, and you can see that
this pressure does not bother us. It is because our bodies have got used to it imperceptibly.’
Perhaps to compensate, the professor is the vehicle for two important speeches in the MS. Our final assessment of him, then, is undoubtedly
some combination of scorn and admiration:
Yes, my boy, these strata of lignites come. . . also from the tropi- cal essences of the New World: these fossil woods were torn from the European or American landmasses, thrown on to the coast of Iceland by the vigorous current of the Gulf Stream, and then slowly mineral- ized under the influence of the sea water, before a still-inexplicable cataclysm dragged them down here.
