‘What an effect if the British Isles were to collapse into a chasm forty leagues deep!’ / ‘Oh! the British would invent themselves ma- chines to get them out again! But there is no question of such a con- vulsion happening. What counts is to know what we are going to do here and now.’
Select Bibliography

Among the modern French editions, Livre de poche, with 44 of the seventy-odd volumes, has been the usual reference edition. In 1988, however, Hachette completed publication of the Voyages extraordinaires at a very reasonable price. Michel de l’Ormeraie and Rencontre (reprinted by Edito-Service) are the only other complete editions since the original Hetzel one.
The only British scholarly books on Verne published to date are: An- drew Martin’s The Mask of the Prophet: The extraordinary fictions of Jules Verne (Oxford Univ. Press, 1990) and William Butcher’s Verne’s Journey to the Centre of the Self: Space and time in the ‘Voyages extraordinaires’ (Macmillan, 1990). Arthur B. Evans’s Jules Verne Rediscovered: Didacti- cism and the scientific novel (Greenwood Press, New York, 1988) is also worth consulting.
Among the French critics, François Raymond and Daniel Compère’s Le Développement des études sur Jules Verne (Minard (Archives des lettres modernes), 1976) is still the most readable introduction to ‘Vernian Stud- ies’. There are many stimulating collections of articles, notably: L’Herne: Jules Verne, ed. P. A. Touttain (L’Herne, 1974), Colloque de Cerisy: Jules Verne et les sciences humaines, ed. François Raymond and Simone Vierne (Union générale d’éditions, 1979), the six volumes of the Minard (Lettres Modernes) series on Verne, especially Machines et imaginaire (1980) and Texte, image, spectacle (1983), and Modernités de Jules Verne, ed. Jean Bessière (Presses Univ. de France, 1988).
The following volumes are also useful: Jean Chesneaux, Une Lecture politique de Jules Verne (Maspero, 1971, 1982), translated as The Political and Social Ideas of Jules Verne (Thames and Hudson, 1972), Simone Vierne, Jules Verne (Balland (Phares), 1986), Alain Froidefond, Voyages au centre de l’horloge: Essai sur un texte-genèse, ‘Maître Zacharius’ (Mi- nard,  1988)  and  Olivier  Dumas,  Jules  Verne  (La  Manufacture,  Lyon,
1988).
The  best  biography  is  Jean  Jules-Verne,  Jules  Verne  (Hachette,
1973), translated and adapted by Roger Greaves as Jules Verne: A biog- raphy (MacDonald and Jane’s, 1976). But there are also Charles-Noël
Martin, La vie et l’oeuvre de Jules Verne (Michel de l’Ormeraie, 1978) and
Marc Soriano, Jules Verne (le cas Verne) (Julliard, 1978).
Studies specifically on Journey to the Centre of the Earth include the well-organised Daniel Compère, Un Voyage imaginaire de Jules Verne:
Voyage au centre de la Terre (Minard (Archives Jules Verne), 1977),
Christian Chelebourg, ‘Le paradis des fossiles’, pp. 213–27, in Modernités de Jules Verne, and Andrew Martin, The Knowledge of Ignorance: From Genesis to Jules Verne, pp. 137–41 and passim (Cambridge Univ. Press,
1985), plus the relevant sections of Butcher, Jules-Verne, Vierne and of the L’Herne, Minard (Lettres Modernes), and Presses Universitaires de France volumes.
[All places of publication are London or Paris unless otherwise indicated.]
A Chronology of Jules Verne


