the house, when the front door groaned on its hinges. Large feet made the wooden staircase creak, and the master of the house came through the dining-room and burst into his study.
On his hurried way through, though, he had thrown his nutcracker- head cane in the corner, his broad hat brushed up the wrong way on the table, and ringing words to his nephew:
‘Axel, I’m here!’
I hadn’t had time to move before the professor shouted again, in a most impatient voice:
‘We-ell? Are you not here yet?’
I rushed into my formidable master’s study.
Otto Lidenbrock was not a bad man, I will gladly concede. But unless changes happen to him, which is highly unlikely, he will die a terrible ec- centric.
He was a professor at the Johanneum,6 and gave a course on miner- alogy, during which he normally got angry at least once or twice. Not that



4 Lidenbrock: Lid is German for ‘eye-lid’, brocken, ‘crumb, lump (of coal) or scrap’ or ‘to pluck’; cf. also Leyden jar.
5 Axel: perhaps from axe (‘axis’); also ‘lexa’ (‘words’) backwards.
he was worried whether his students were assiduous at his lectures, or whether they paid attention, or whether they were successful later: he hardly bothered with these details. He lectured ‘subjectively’, to use the expression from German philosophy, for himself and not for others. He was a learned egoist and a selfish scholar, a well of science whose handle groaned whenever someone wanted to draw something out of it: in a word, a miser.
In Germany there are one or two professors like this.
Unfortunately my uncle suffered from a slight pronunciation problem, if not in private, at least when speaking in public: a regrettable handicap
for an orator. Thus, during his demonstrations at the Johanneum, often
the professor would stop short. He would struggle with a recalcitrant word which his mouth refused to pronounce, one of those words which resist, swell up, and end up coming out in the unscientific form of a swear-word. Then he would get very angry.
Now, in mineralogy there are many learned words, half-Greek, half- Latin, and always difficult to pronounce, many unpolished terms that would scorch a poet’s lips. I do not wish to criticise this science. Far from it. But when one is in the presence of rhombohedral crystallisations, reti- nasphalt resins, gehlenites, fangasites,7 lead molybdates, manganese tungstates, or zircon titanites, the most agile tongue is allowed to get tied in knots.
The townspeople knew about this pardonable disability of my uncle’s, and took unfair advantage. They watched out for the difficult sections, and he got furious, and they laughed; which is not in good taste, even for Germans. And if there was always a healthy attendance at Lidenbrock’s lectures, how many followed them regularly simply in order to enjoy the professor’s terrible outbursts!
