But despite all this, my uncle was an authentic scholar—I cannot em- phasise this too much. Although he sometimes broke his samples by han- dling them too roughly, he combined the geologist’s talent with the min- eralogist’s eye. With his mallet, his steel spike, his magnetic needle, his blowlamp, and his flask of nitric acid, he was highly gifted. From the frac- ture, appearance, resistance, melting-point, sound, smell, and taste of any given mineral, he could put it without hesitation into any one of the six hundred categories recognised by modern science.
Lidenbrock’s name was accordingly very much honoured in the gym- nasiums and learned societies. Sir Humphry Davy, Humboldt, and Cap- tains Franklin and Sabine8   made sure they visited him on their way


6  the Johanneum: a famous classical grammar school, founded in Hamburg in 1529 and still in existence.
7  ghelenites, fangasites: neither word seems to be in the dictionaries. The
first may even be gelignites (‘gélinites’ is a variant spelling in French).
8 Davy: see note in ch. 6; Humboldt: Baron von Friedrich H. A. (1769–1859), German naturalist and traveller, also worked in Paris, author notably of Kosmos
(1845), an essay on the physical constitution of the globe; Franklin: Sir John
(1786–1847), British arctic explorer, died after discovering Northwest Passage—
through Hamburg. Messrs Becquerel, Ebelmen, Brewster, Dumas, Milne- Edwards, and Sainte-Claire Deville9  liked to consult him on the most stimulating questions in chemistry. That science owed him some wonder- ful discoveries. In 1853 there had appeared in Leipzig a Treatise upon Transcendental Crystallography by Professor O. Lidenbrock, printed in large-folio pages with plates—but without covering its costs.
Add to that that my uncle was the curator of the mineralogical muse- um of Mr Struve, the Russian ambassador, which was a valuable collec-
tion much esteemed throughout Europe.
Such was the character calling for me so impatiently. Imagine a tall, thin man, with an iron constitution and youthful blond hair that made him look a good ten years younger than his fifty. His big eyes darted inces- santly around behind imposing glasses; his nose, long and thin, was like a sharpened blade; unkind people even claimed that it was magnetised, and picked up iron filings. Absolute slander: it only picked up snuff, but in ra- ther large quantities to tell the truth.
If I add that my uncle took mathematical strides of exactly three feet, and that, while walking, he firmly clenched his fists—the sign of an impet- uous temperament—then you will know him well enough not to wish to spend too much time in his company.
He lived in his little house on Königstrasse, a half-wood, half-brick construction with a crenelated gable-end. It looked out on to one of the winding canals that criss-cross in the centre of the oldest part of Ham- burg, fortunately unharmed by the fire of 1842.
The old house leaned a little, it is true, it pushed its stomach out at the passers-by, and it wore its roof over one ear, like the cap of a Tu- gendbund10  student. The harmony of its lines could have been better, then; but, all things considered, it held up well, thanks to an old elm, vig- orously embedded in the façade, which, each springtime, used to push its flowering blossoms through the latticed windows.
My uncle was not poor, not for a German professor. The house was entirely his, both building and contents. The latter consisted of his god-


