

as proved by an expedition later organized by his wife; Sabine: (later General) Sir Edward (1788–1883), British astronomer, accompanied Ross and Parry to Arctic 1818–20, specialist in terrestrial magnetism.
9  Becquerel: either Antoine César (1788–1878), used electrolysis to isolate metals from their ores, or possibly his son and assistant Alexander Edmond
(1820–91), researched into solar radiation and diamagnetism; Ebelmen: (Verne:
‘Ebelman’) Jacques Joseph (1814–52), French chemist who synthesized precious stones; Brewster: probably Sir David (1781–1868), Scottish physicist, invented the kaleidoscope; Dumas: Jean-Baptiste André (1800–84), French chemist, not- ed for his research on vapour density and atomic weight; Milne-Edwards: see note in ch. 37; Sainte-Claire Deville: Henri-Étienne (1818-81), chemist specializ- ing in aluminium, and brother of Charles (1814-76), French geologist and author of Éruptions actuelles du volcan de Stromboli.
10 Tugendbund: ‘League of Virtue’ (1808–16).
daughter Gräuben, a seventeen-year-old girl from Virland,11  and Martha and myself. In my dual capacity as nephew and orphan, I had become the laboratory assistant for his experiments.
I will admit that I devoured geological science with great relish; I had mineralogist’s blood in my veins, and never felt bored in the company of my precious pebbles.
In sum, life could be happy in this miniature house in Königstrasse, despite its owner’s impatience; for, while setting about it in rather a
rough manner, he did not love me any the less. But the man had never
learned to wait, he was permanently in a hurry.
When, in April, he planted heads of mignonette or morning glory in the china pots in his living-room, he would go and pull their leaves each
morning to make them grow faster.
With such an eccentric, the only thing to do was to obey. I accordingly hurried into his study.

2

This study was a real museum. Specimens of the whole mineral order could be found here, labelled in the most perfect order, following the three great divisions into inflammable, metallic, and lithoidal minerals.
How well I knew them, these trinkets of mineralogical science; how many times, instead of wasting my time with boys of my own age, I had
