enjoyed dusting these graphites, these anthracites, these coals, these lig-
nites, and these peats. The bitumens, the resins, the organic salts which had to be preserved from the least speck of dust. The metals, from iron to gold, whose relative value didn’t count beside the absolute equality of sci- entific specimens. And all those stones, which would have been enough to rebuild the whole house in Königstrasse, even with a fine extra room, which would have suited me to a T.
But when I went into the study, I was scarcely thinking about such wonders. My uncle formed the sole focus of my thoughts. He was buried in his large armchair covered with Utrecht velvet, holding a tome in both hands and studying it with the deepest admiration.
‘What a book, what a book!’ he kept saying.
This exclamation reminded me that Professor Lidenbrock was a fanati- cal book collector in his spare time. But a volume had no value in his eyes unless it was unfindable or, at the very least, unreadable.
‘Well?’ he said. ‘Do you not see? It’s a priceless gem I discovered this morning while poking around in the shop of Hevelius the Jew.’
‘Magnificent,’ I replied, with forced enthusiasm.


11  Gräuben: Verne wrote ‘Graüben’ throughout, but, in line with normal German practice, this has been changed to ‘Gräuben’: graben (in English and in French), ‘an elongated depression between geologic faults’; Grauen, 'horror, dread'; üben, 'to drill or exercise; from Virland: Verne’s choice may be motivat- ed by puns based on ViRlanDaisE and on ‘Vinland’ (the Scandinavian colony in N. America, c.1100, settled from Iceland) + vir (Latin for ‘man’; cf. ‘virile’—it is Gräuben who wears the trousers).
What was the point of making such a fuss about an old quarto book whose spine and covers seemed to be made out of coarse vellum, a yel- lowish book from which hung a faded tassel?
The professor’s exclamations of admiration didn’t stop, however.
‘Look,’ he said, addressing both the questions and the replies to him- self, ‘isn’t it beautiful? Yes, it’s wonderful, and what a binding! Does the
book open easily? Yes, it stays open at any page whatsoever. But does it
close well? Yes, because the cover and leaves form a unified whole, with- out separating or gaping anywhere. And this spine, which does not have a single break after seven hundred years of existence. Oh, it’s a binding to have made Bozérian, Closs, or Purgold12 proud!’
While speaking, my uncle was alternately opening and closing the old book. The only thing I could do was ask him about its contents, though they didn’t interest me a single bit.
‘And what’s the title of this marvellous volume?’ I asked with too ea- ger an enthusiasm to be genuine.
‘This work’, replied my uncle, getting excited, ‘is the Heims-kringla of Snorri Sturluson,13 the famous twelfth-century Icelandic author. It is the chronicle of the Norwegian princes who ruled over Iceland.’
‘Really,’ I exclaimed as well as I could. ‘It’s presumably a German translation?’
‘What!’ the professor replied animatedly. ‘A translation! What would I
