which have deliberately been mixed up, and which, if properly laid out, would form an intelligible sentence. When I think that there is perhaps here the explanation or indication of a great discovery!’
For my part, I thought there was absolutely nothing, but kept my opinions carefully to myself.
The professor then took the book and the parchment and compared
them with each other.
‘The two documents are not in the same hand. The cipher is posterior to the book for I can see an immediate and irrefutable proof: the first let- ter is a double m16 that would be sought in vain in Sturluson’s book, for it was added to the Icelandic alphabet only in the fourteenth century. So therefore at least two hundred years elapsed between the manuscript and the document.’
That, I must admit, seemed quite logical.
‘I am therefore led to think’, said my uncle, ‘that one of the owners of the book must have written out the mysterious characters. But who the
devil was this owner? Might he not have inserted his name at some point
in the manuscript?’
My uncle lifted his glasses up, took a strong magnifying glass, and carefully worked his way over the first few pages of the book. On the back of the second one, the half-title page, he discovered a sort of stain,17 which to the naked eye looked like an ink-blot. However, looking closer, it was possible to distinguish a few half-erased characters. My uncle realised that this was the interesting part, so he concentrated on the blemish, and with the help of his big magnifying glass he ended up distinguishing the following symbols, runic characters which he spelled out without hesita- tion:







16 double m: the corresponding rune is which, as Lidenbrock says, is intend- ed to equal a double m, whereas the other m’s in the message are . The French edition, nevertheless, gives ‘m.rnlls’: this has been corrected to ‘mm.rnlls’, in the light of Verne’s own transcription of on the next page, namely mm.
17 stain: there is an anecdote, reported by Maurice Métral in Sur les pas de
Jules Verne (Neuchâtel, Nouvelle Bibliothèque, 1963), that Verne found the fad- ed log-book of a frigate captain called Pierre Leguerte; it had a bloodstain on the last page, and he is meant to have often speculated what had happened to the author. But Métral is often unreliable, and there is no supporting evidence for this story.
