which I had written. ‘This is a series of 132 letters, presented in apparent disorder. There are words where the consonants are encountered on their own, like the first one, “mm.rnlls”; others in contrast where the vowels are abundant, for example the fifth word, “unteief”, or the second-but- last one, “oseibo”. Now the arrangement is clearly not deliberate. It is given mathematically by the unknown formula governing the succession of the letters. It seems certain to me that the original sentence must have been written normally, then jumbled up following a rule we have yet to discover. The person who got access to the key of the cipher would be able to read it fluently: but what is this key? Axel, do you have the key?’
To his question I replied nothing, and for a good reason. I was gazing at a charming portrait on the wall: one of Gräuben. My uncle’s ward was then in Altona,21 staying with one of her relatives. Her absence made me very sad, because, I can admit it now, the pretty little Virland girl and the professor’s nephew loved each other with all Germanic patience and calm. We had got engaged without my uncle knowing—he was too much of a geologist  to  understand  such  feelings.  Gräuben  was  a  charming  girl, blonde with blue eyes, of a slightly serious character; but she did not love me any the less for that. For my part, I adored her—if, that is, the word exists in the Teutonic language. As a result of all this, the picture of my little Virland girl immediately switched me from the world of reality to that of daydreams, that of memories.
I was watching the faithful companion of my work and pleasure. Each day she helped me organise my uncle’s precious stones, and labelled them with me. Miss Gräuben was a very fine mineralogist. She would have borne comparison with more than one scholar, for she loved getting to the bottom of the driest scientific questions. How many charming hours we had spent studying together; and how often I had been jealous of the fate of the unfeeling stones that she had manipulated with her graceful hands!
Then, when the time for recreation had come, the two of us would go out. We used to walk through the bushy paths of the Alster22  and head


21  Altona: Sartre’s Les Séquestrés d’Altona (1959) was set here, and the stage directions indicate a nineteenth-century room; in the autobiographical Les Mots (1963), Sartre repeatedly emphasizes his early passion for Verne.
22 the Alster: joins the Elbe in Hamburg.
together for the old tar-covered mill which looked so fine at the far end of the lake. On the way we would chat while holding hands. I would tell her things and she would laugh heartily at them. In this way we would arrive on the banks of the Elbe; then, having said goodnight to the swans glid- ing around amongst the great white water lilies, we would come back by steam ferry to the quayside.
I was just at this point in my daydream when my uncle, hitting the ta- ble with his fist, brought me violently back to reality.
‘Let’s see,’ he said. ‘In order to mix up the letters of a sentence, it
seems to me that the first idea to come into one’s mind ought to be to write the words vertically instead of horizontally.’
‘Clever . . . ’ I thought.
‘We must see what it produces. Axel, write any sentence at all on this scrap of paper; but, instead of writing the letters one after the other, put
them in vertical columns made up of groups of fives or sixes.’
I understood what was required and immediately wrote from top to bottom:
I y y l u l o l e b
o u i G e
v , t r n
e m t ä .
