I didn’t dare admit that with such an uncompromising individual as my uncle, this fate seemed nigh on certain.
The old servant went back into the kitchen, looking very worried and muttering.
Alone again, I thought of going to tell Gräuben everything. But how could I get out of the house? The professor might come back at any mo-
ment. What if he summonsed me? Or if he wanted to start work again on
that word-puzzle which even old Oedipus couldn’t have solved?23 And if I
wasn’t there when he called for me, what might happen then?
It was safest to stay put. As it happened, a mineralogist from Besan- çon had just sent us a collection of siliceous geodes that needed sorting
out. I set to work. I classified these hollow stones with their little crystals
moving inside, I prepared labels, I arranged them in the presentation cases.
But this activity didn’t require all my concentration. The problem of the old document wouldn’t stop disturbing me in a most peculiar fashion.
My head was swirling and I felt vaguely anxious. I had the feeling that something terrible was about to happen.
An hour later, my geodes were stacked in neat little rows. I fell into the massive Utrecht armchair, my arms lolling over the sides and my
head leaning back. I lit my pipe, the one with the long curved stem and the bowl carved into a casually reclining water-nymph; and then had
great fun watching it burn, slowly converting my nymphette into an unal- loyed negress. From time to time I listened out for steps hammering up
the stairs. But none came. Where could my uncle be at this moment? I
imagined him running around under the splendid trees on the Altona road, waving his arms, firing at the walls with his walking-stick, flattening the grass at a stroke, beheading the thistles, disturbing the lonely storks from their sleep.
Would he come back triumphant or discouraged? Who would win, him or the secret? I was wondering about such matters, and without thinking picked up the sheet of paper on which I had written the incomprehensible sequence of letters. I repeated to myself:
‘What can it possibly mean?’
I tried to group the letters into words. I couldn’t! Whether you put them into twos, threes, fives, or sixes, nothing came out that made
sense. The fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth letters did produce the
