English word ice. The eighty-fourth, eighty-fifth, and eighty-sixth ones gave sir. In the middle of the document, in the third line,24 I spotted the Latin words rota, mutabile, ira, nec, and atra.
‘It’s amazing! These last few words seem to confirm my uncle’s view about the language of the document! In the fourth line I can even see lu- co, which means “sacred wood”. It’s true that the third line also includes tabiled, which sounds completely Hebrew to me, and the last one, mer, arc, and mère, pure and unadulterated French.’
It was enough to drive you out of your mind. Four different languages in the same preposterous sentence! What possible connection could there
be between ice, sir, anger, cruel, sacred wood, changeable, mother, bow,
and sea? Only the first and last were easily linked: in a document written in Iceland, it was hardly surprising that there should be a ‘sea of ice’. But putting the rest of the puzzle back together was another matter entirely.


23 that word-puzzle. . . solved: part of Oedipus’s quest was to solve a riddle set him by the Sphinx.
24 in the third line: in fact, in the second and third lines.
I was struggling with an insoluble problem; my brain started over- heating, my eyes blinking at the sheet. The 132 letters seemed to dance around me, like those silver drops which float above your head when there is a sudden rush of blood to it.
I was having a sort of hallucination; I was suffocating; I needed some fresh air. Absent-mindedly I fanned myself using the piece of paper, with
the back and the front passing alternately before my eyes.
Imagine my surprise when I thought I caught sight of perfectly intelli- gible words during a quick turn of the sheet, just as the other side came into view: Latin words like craterem and terrestre!
Suddenly  my  mind  sparked;  through  the  fleeting  glimpses  I  had caught sight of the truth; I had discovered how the code worked. To un-
derstand the document, you didn’t even need to read it through the pa-
per. Far from it. In its original form, exactly as it had been spelled out to me, it could easily be decoded. The professor’s ingenious attempts were all finally paying off. He had been right about the way the letters were ar- ranged and right about the language the document was written in. A mere ‘nothing’25 had stopped him reading the Latin sentence from begin- ning to end, and this self-same ‘nothing’ had just fallen into my lap by pure chance. You can imagine how excited I felt. My eyes went out of fo- cus and I couldn’t see anything. I had spread the piece of paper out on the table. All I had to do now to possess the secret was to glance at it.
At last I managed to calm down. I forced myself to walk round the room twice to settle my nerves; then came back and immersed myself again in the huge armchair.
I drew a large supply of air into my lungs, and shouted: ‘Read on!’
I bent over the table. I placed my finger on each successive letter and, without stopping, without slowing down at all, read the whole mes- sage out loud.
What amazement, what terror entered my soul! At first it was like be- ing hit by a blow you didn’t expect. What, had the things I had just dis- covered really happened? A man had been daring enough to penetrate. . .
