




Introduction

In France, Jules Verne is not the same person as in Britain. South of the Channel, Verne is recognised as an authentic, nineteenth-century writer with a proper set of Collected Works. Since the 1960s, any sur- prise, condescension or irony at reading or studying the Voyages extraor- dinaires has disappeared, even among those who never actually buy any books. Balzac, Stendhal, Verne, Zola: the odd man out, the least inte- grated into Gallic national culture, is the Italianate Stendhal.
But in the English-speaking countries it is rare to meet adults who will admit to liking Verne. He is a children’s author, a writer of science-fiction, a poor stylist, at best responsible for films starring James Mason. His works may be fiction, but certainly don’t count as literature. He is short- trousered, not really French, and has nothing to say about the ‘human condition’.
One reason for such a disparity must be the generally atrocious Eng- lish ‘translations’. The overwhelming majority of books by ‘Djools’ Verne are leaden or wooden, and possibly infringe the Trade Descriptions Act. They have lost up to half their contents, but have gained instead some wonderful howlers. There is no equivalent here to Baudelaire’s Poe, or to Scott Moncrieff’s Proust, with their textual ‘thickness’ and their sense of overall belonging.
Journey to the Centre of the Earth has been translated more than ten times, but many are very poor indeed. The best-known version is still the atrocious 1872 one, which rebaptises Axel as Harry and Lidenbrock as Hardwigg, makes them both Scottish, and finishes each paragraph with at least one totally invented sentence.
But this novel hardly deserves such treatment. It was the first un- qualified critical success of Verne’s—and the first to be written under the
close monitoring of his publisher and mentor Hetzel. Journey to the Cen-
tre of the Earth is, above all, a brilliant piece of writing. It is an unparal- leled entertainment, but one that also stands comparison with other liter- ary works of the nineteenth century.
The plot can be quickly summarised: Professor Lidenbrock and his nephew Axel discover a document in a twelfth-century Icelandic book which, when deciphered, records the claim of a certain Arne Saknussemm to have gone down into the carter of Snaefells and reached the centre of the Earth. Lidenbrock decides to try this for himself and, dragging Axel away from his fiancée Gräuben, travels to Reykjavik and across Iceland. With the help of the stoical Hans, they find the crater and travel down through the geological layers of the past, experiencing various adven- tures. A long way down, they discover a huge caver containing a large sea—plus various biological specimens, some dead and some very much alive. After trying to cross the sea, they discover a path down again,
marked with Saknussemm’s runic initials. But it is now blocked. They at- tempt to blow up the obstacle, while sheltering on the raft, but instead carry part of the sea with them down into the bowels of the Earth. They then start rising again; and end up riding a volcanic eruption, which throws them out on the slopes of Stromboli.
Journey to the Centre of the Earth prefigures many of the ideas of Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Seas, Around the World in Eighty Days, and From the Earth to the Moon. The mood is light-hearted— although hardly optimistic, for it contains tragic, obsessive and sometimes morbid elements. There is even a love-element, of sorts. In this novel, more than elsewhere, Verne seems to let himself go, while at the same time drawing inspiration from many different sources. But before examin- ing these, it is useful to look at Verne’s life and the Extraordinary Jour- neys as a whole.
Jules-Gabriel Verne was born in 1828, on an island in central Nantes in western France. His father had a successful law practice, and wrote oc- casional amateur verses. His mother’s maiden name was Allotte de la
Fule, derived from a Scottish Allott who had emigrated in the fifteenth
century to join Louis XI’s Scottish Guard of archers and eventually been ennobled.
