For three long hours, my uncle worked without a word, without look- ing up—rubbing out, starting again, crossing out, setting to for the ump-
teenth time.
I knew full well that if he managed to put the letters into every single order possible, then the right sentence would come out. But I also knew that a mere twenty letters can form two quintillion, four hundred and thir- ty-two quadrillion, nine hundred and two trillion, eight billion, one hun- dred and seventy-six million, six hundred and forty thousand combina- tions. In fact there were
132 letters in the sentence; and these 132 letters produced a total number of sentences that had at least 133 digits,26  one that is virtually impossible to enumerate and goes completely beyond the bounds of im- agination.
I therefore felt reassured about the heroic way of solving the problem. But time passed; night came; the street noises died down; my uncle,
still bent over his work, didn’t see anything, didn’t notice Martha half- opening the door. He heard nothing, not even the voice of the faithful
servant:
‘Will Sir be having supper tonight?’
Martha had to go away again without a response. As for myself, after fighting it for some time, an irresistible drowsiness came over me, and I
fell asleep on the end of the sofa, while my Uncle Lidenbrock continued
his adding up, his taking away, and his crossing out.
When I woke again the following morning, the inexorable worker was still at it. His eyes were red, his face pale, his hair tousled by a feverish
hand, and his cheekbones glowed purple. All were signs of a terrible
struggle with the impossible, showing what tiredness of mind and what exertions of the brain must have filled the long hours.



26 20 letters. . . 133 digits: the figure for 20 letters (20 factorial) is correct, provided that all 20 letters are diferent; but 132 factorial has in fact 125 digits.
I was genuinely sorry for him. In spite of the reproaches I probably had the right to make, I felt considerable pity. The poor man was so pos- sessed by his idea that he had quite forgotten to be angry. His whole en- ergy was concentrated on a single point, and since it could not escape through its normal outlet, it was to be feared that it might simply explode at any moment.
With a single act I could undo the iron hoop wrapped tight round his brain—with just one word. I did nothing.
