But I had a kind heart. Why did I not speak out in such circumstanc-
es? For my uncle’s own sake.
‘No, no,’ I repeated, ‘no. I’m not going to say anything. He would only want to go there, I know him, nothing would stop him. He has a volcanic
imagination and he would risk his life to do what no geologist has ever
done before. I will not say anything; I will keep this secret given to me by chance. To let it out would be tantamount to killing Professor Lidenbrock. Let him guess if he can. I don’t want to feel responsible one day for hav- ing sent him to his death!’
Once my mind was made up, I crossed my arms and waited. But I
hadn’t reckoned with something that happened a few hours later.
When Martha tried to go out to the market, she found the door locked. The big key was not in the keyhole. Who had taken it out? Obviously my
uncle, when he had come back from his hasty excursion the day before.
Was it on purpose? Or was it through absent-mindedness? Did he want us to feel real hunger pains? That seemed to be going a bit far. Why should Martha and I suffer because of a situation that had nothing what- soever to do with us? But apparently this was the case, and I recalled a frightening precedent. A few years before, when my uncle had been work- ing on his grand mineral classification, he had remained forty-eight hours without eating, and his whole household had had to follow his scientific diet. As a result, I acquired stomach cramps that were not much fun for a boy of a fairly ravenous nature.
It now seemed that breakfast was going to go the same way as sup- per the day before. Nevertheless I resolved to be heroic and not to give in to the demands of hunger. Martha took it very seriously: she was incon- solable, the poor woman. As for myself, being unable to leave the house upset me more, with good reason, as I am sure you will understand.
My uncle was still working; his mind was lost in a world of combina- tions; he lived far from the Earth and truly beyond worldly needs.
At about twelve o’clock, though, hunger began to cause me serious
problems. Martha, very innocently, had devoured the supplies in the lar- der the day before, and so there was nothing left in the whole house. I held on, however. I considered it a matter of honour.
Two o’clock chimed. The situation was becoming ridiculous, intolerable even. My eyes began to look very big. I started to tell myself that I was
exaggerating the importance of the document; that in any case my uncle
wouldn’t believe what it said; that he would regard it as a mere practical joke; that if the worst came to the worst he could be restrained against
his will if he wanted to attempt the expedition; and that he might easily find the code himself, in which case all my efforts at abstinence would have been in vain.
These all seemed excellent reasons to me, although I would have in- dignantly rejected them the day before. I even con-sidered it a terrible mistake to have waited so long; and I made up my mind to reveal all.
I was therefore looking for a way into the subject, one that wasn’t too sudden, when, without warning, the professor stood up, put his hat on,
