‘?’
‘And yours too!’ concluded the merciless professor, striding into the dining-room.

6

These last words sent a shiver through my whole body. I kept my self- control though. I even resolved to put on a brave face. Only scientific ar- guments could stop Professor Lidenbrock now. And there was no lack of arguments, and good ones, against such a journey being possible. Go to the centre of the Earth? What madness! But I kept my reasoning for a more suitable moment, and instead gave my full attention to the meal.
There would be little point in reproducing here my uncle’s curses when he saw the cleared-away table. Things were duly explained to him, and Martha freed again. Running to the market, she managed so well that an hour later my hunger was satisfied, and I could begin to be aware of the situation once more.
During the meal, my uncle had been almost cheerful: there escaped from him some of those scholars’ jokes that never become really danger-
ous. After the last course, he beckoned me into his study.
I obeyed. He sat at one side of his desk, with me at another.
‘Axel,’ he said in a voice that was almost kindly, ‘you are a highly gift- ed boy; you were of great assistance to me when I was worn out by my
efforts and about to give up looking for the combination. Where would I


28 calends: the first day of the month in the Roman calendar.
29  Leyden jar: a kind of electrical condenser with a glass jar as a dielectric between sheets of tin foil, invented in 1745 at Leyden University.
have ended up? No one can guess. I will never forget that, my boy, and you will have your fair share of the fame we are going to achieve.’
‘Now’s my chance!’ I thought. ‘He’s in a good mood: the moment to discuss the aforementioned fame.’
‘. . . Above all,’ my uncle continued, ‘total secrecy must be main-
tained, do you hear? In the scientific world, there is no shortage of people jealous of me, and many of them would dearly love to tackle this journey. But they will have no inkling of it until we get back.’
