‘Do you really believe there’d be so many takers?’
‘Most definitely! Who would think twice about gaining such celebrity? If people knew of the document, a whole army of geologists would rush to follow in Arne Saknussemm’s footsteps!’
‘That’s where I’m not totally convinced, Uncle, for nothing proves that the manuscript is genuine.’
‘What! And the book we discovered it in?’
‘All right, I accept that this Saknussemm wrote the message, but does it necessarily follow that he actually carried out the journey? Couldn’t the old parchment just be a practical joke?’
I half-regretted this last idea, admittedly a bit daring. The professor’s thick eyebrows frowned, and I was afraid that the rest of the conversation might not go as I wished. But fortunately it didn’t turn out like that. A sort of smile played over my stern questioner’s lips, as he replied:
‘That is what we are going to find out.’
‘H’m!’ I said, a little annoyed. ‘Allow me first to exhaust all possible objections concerning the document.’
‘Speak, my boy, give yourself full rein. I grant you every freedom to
express your opinion. You are no longer my nephew, but my colleague. Pray proceed.’
‘Well, I will first ask you what Yocul, Snaefells, and Scartaris mean, since I have never even heard of them.’
‘That’s easy. As it happens, I received a map not very long ago from my friend August Peterman of Leipzig.30 It couldn’t have arrived at a bet- ter time. Take down the third atlas on the second section in the big book- case, series Z, shelf 4.’
I got up and, thanks to the precise instructions, quickly found the re- quired atlas. My uncle opened it:
‘This is Anderson’s, one of the best maps of Iceland, and it may easily provide us with solutions to all your problems.’
I leant over the map.
‘See this island of volcanoes’, said the professor, ‘and notice that they all bear the name “jökull”. This means “glacier” in Icelandic and, at that northerly latitude, most of the eruptions reach the light of day through the layers of ice. Hence this name “jökull” applied to all the fire-producing peaks of the island.’
‘Fine. But what about Snaefells?’


30 August Petermann of Leipzig: (Verne: ‘Augustus Peterman’) 1822–78, car- tographer and geographer, in fact from Hamburg and Gotha.
