My uncle concentrated for a few seconds. My hope came back for a
moment, but only for a moment, for soon he replied to me as follows:
‘What you call a mystery is crystal clear for me. It proves with what care and ingenuity Saknussemm wished to indicate his discovery. Snae-
fells is composed of several craters; it was therefore necessary to pinpoint
which is the one that leads to the centre of the globe. What did our schol- arly Icelander do? Our Icelandic scholar observed that as the calends of July approached, that is towards the end of June, one of the mountain peaks, called Scartaris, cast its shadow as far as the opening of the rele- vant crater, and he noted this fact in his document. Could he have found a more precise indication, and—once we are on the summit of Snaefells— can there be a moment’s hesitation as to the path to follow?’
Decidedly my uncle had an answer for everything. I saw full well that he was unassailable on the words of the ancient parchment. So I stopped pressing him on that subject and, since the most important thing was to
convince him, turned to the scientific objections, in my view much more serious.
‘All right, I am forced to accept that Saknussemm’s message is clear and can leave no doubt in one’s mind. I even grant that the document
looks perfectly authentic. So this scholar went to the bottom of Snaefells;
he saw the shadow of Scartaris lingering on the edge of the crater just before the calends of July; he probably even heard the people of his time recounting legends that this crater led to the centre of the Earth. But as to whether he went down there himself, whether he carried out the jour- ney and came back, whether he even undertook it: no, a hundred times no!’
‘And the reason?’ asked my uncle in a singularly mocking tone.
‘Because all the scientific theories demonstrate that such an undertak- ing is impossible!’
‘All the theories say that?’ replied the professor, putting on a good-
natured appearance. ‘Oh the nasty theories. They’re going to get terribly in our way, the poor theories!’
I could see that he was making fun of me, but continued regardless:
‘Yes, it is well known that the temperature increases by approximately one degree centigrade for every seventy feet you go below the surface of the globe. Now, assuming that this ratio remains constant, and given that the radius of the Earth is about four thousand miles,31 the temperature at the centre will be well over 200,000 ° . The substances at the Earth’s core exist therefore as white-hot gases, for even metals like gold or platinum, even the hardest rocks, cannot resist such a temperature. My question whether it is possible to travel in such an environment is consequently a reasonable one!’
‘So, Axel, it is the heat that bothers you?’
‘Certainly. If we were to attain a depth of only twenty-five miles, we would have reached the limit of the Earth’s crust, for the temperature would already be more than 1,400 ° .’
‘And you are afraid of melting?’
‘I leave the question for you to decide,’ I replied sharply.
