‘Here is what I decide,’ said Professor Lidenbrock, assuming an im- portant air. ‘It is that neither you nor anyone else knows for certain what happens in the Earth’s interior, given that scarcely a twelve-thousandth part of its radius is known. It is that science is eminently perfectible, and that each existing theory is constantly replaced by a new one. Was it not believed before Fourier32  that the temperature of interplanetary space


31  4,000 miles: (‘quinze cents lieues’) in ch. 39, the same ‘quinze cents lieues’ is given as the distance still to go. In ch. 25, the radius at the latitude of Iceland is given more exactly as ‘quinze cent quatre-vingt-trois lieues et un tiers’ (3,936 miles, if a French league is taken to be exactly 4 km.—the modern figure for the equatorial radius is 3,963 miles).
32 Fourier: Jean Baptiste Joseph (1768–1830). Known today as a mathemati- cian for the Fourier series, his work was carried out on heat diffusion, which led him to invent the idea of partial differential equations.
went down indefinitely, and is it not known now that the greatest cold in the ether does not go beyond 40 or 50 ° below zero? Why should it not be the same for the internal heat? Why should it not encounter at a certain depth a limit that cannot be crossed, instead of reaching the point where the most obdurate minerals liquefy?’
Since my uncle placed the question on the terrain of hypotheses, I
had no reply to make.
‘Well, Axel, I can tell you that real scientists, amongst them Poisson,33
have proved that if a temperature of 200,000 ° actually existed inside the globe, the white-hot gases produced by the fusion of the solids would ac-
quire such force that the Earth’s crust could not resist and would explode
like the walls of a boiler under steam pressure.’
‘Poisson’s opinion, Uncle, that’s all.’
‘Agreed, but it is also the opinion of other distinguished geologists that the interior of the globe is not formed of gas, nor of water, nor of the heaviest rocks that we know. The reason is that, if it were, the Earth would only weigh half as much as it does.’
‘Oh, you can prove anything you want with figures!’
‘And can you, my boy, with facts? Is it not true that the number of volcanoes has considerably decreased since the first days of the world?34
And if there is indeed heat in the centre, can one not deduce that it is also tending to diminish?’
‘Uncle, if you’re entering the realm of suppositions, there is nothing more I can say.’
‘And I have to say that my opinion is shared by highly competent fig- ures. Do you remember a visit that the famous British chemist Sir Humphry Davy paid me in 1825?’35
‘Hardly, as I only came into the world nineteen years later.’
