There have been over a dozen biographies of Verne, most notably by his niece Marguerite Allotte de la Fuÿe and his grandson Jean Jules-Verne.
The former, however, is embellished and bowdlerised; and even the latter is a mixture of family legends and manuscript sources often readily acces-
sible, including over 1,000 letters from Verne to his parents and publish- er. About a dozen interviews are also known to exist, mostly with British
and American journalists, plus a brief autobiographical piece, ‘Memories of
Childhood and Youth’. Lastly there is Backwards into Britain, a lightly fic- tionalised account of his visit to England and Scotland in 1859 with his
friend Hignard.
A no doubt apocryphal story has Jules running away to sea at the age of 11 to fetch coral on the Coralie for his cousin Caroline. Her rejection of him, several years later, certainly seems to have left its mark on him. But otherwise his schooldays were unexceptional—apart from a passion for messing about on makeshift rafts on the River Loire with his brother Paul.
In 1847 Jules arrived in Paris to study law. For the next ten years, he lived in a succession of single rooms, sometimes with barely enough to eat. He devoted himself during this period to writing plays, at which he was moderately successful: of the total of approximately twenty-nine, seven had been performed or published by 1863, at least one of them with the help of Dumas père. In 1856 he met Honorine de Viane, a widow with two daughters, and married her a few months later.
The journey to Britain (his first outside France) had a major impact on him, especially Edinburgh and the Highlands. Although his visit was care-
fully written up (making it the first book Verne completed), Voyage en
Angleterre et en Ecosse was rejected by Hetzel—and lay hidden until
1989, when it was published and hailed as a brilliant piece of travel writ-
ing, and a vital document for understanding Verne. It was published in
English in 1992.
From 1851–5, Verne published five short stories, in which many of the themes and structures of his novels are already visible. Each one con-
cerns the difficulty of getting things going (like Verne’s own careers). All
are set in foreign parts, all are influenced by late Romanticism, and all fin- ish more or less tragically.
In 1862, Hetzel accepted a book entitled Five Weeks in a Balloon. Within months, it had become a huge success, and led to a series of con-
tracts for the next forty years. The principal aims of the collected works, in Hetzel’s immodest announcement, were ‘to sum up all the geograph-
ical, geological, physical and astronomical knowledge amassed by modern science, and to rewrite the history of the universe’. At the age of 37,
