Verne acquired some security, even if the contracts were far from gener- ous (the plays adapted from the novels proved more lucrative). Starting
in 1864 with Journey to the Centre of the Earth, one or two books duly appeared each year, eventually totalling sixty-three novels and eighteen
short stories.
Verne continued to travel. In 1862 he had visited Norway and Den- mark, again with Hignard, and in 1867 he sailed to America on the liner the Great Eastern. He also bought three yachts of successively greater size, on which he went back to Scotland and Scandinavia and visited North Africa. In 1872 the family moved permanently to Amiens. In 1886, for reasons which remain unknown, Verne sold his yacht and gave up travelling.
In 1861 his only child, Michel, had been born. He proved unruly, and was at one stage forcibly packed off to India as an apprentice pilot. In
1883, he eloped with a 16-year-old girl—but eventually divorced his first
wife and re-married. He tried his hand at many careers, including scien- tific journalism and fiction-writing, one of his stories being published in
1889 under his father’s name.
After Verne’s death in 1905, eight novels and three short stories were published in the series of Extraordinary Journeys. These works are slightly different from the previous ones; Michel publicly declared that he had prepared some of them for publication, but denied doing anything more. Only in 1978 was it proved, on the basis of the manuscripts, that he had made considerable changes, including writing whole chapters. Two-thirds of The Survivors of the ‘Jonathan’, for instance, are his, including the many philosophico-political passages; and perhaps even more of the mas- terpiece ‘The Eternal Adam’, set 20,000 years in the future.
The Journeys are characterised by simplicity, most evidently in their language, where clarity of thought and a flowing style produce ease of
comprehension. Like the Parables or Aesop’s Fables, though, there are
layers of implicit meanings that often work against the surface level, mak- ing Verne an ‘underground revolutionary’. Again, the subject matter os- tensibly avoids what many have thought to be the primary aim of the novel, namely an account of psychological processes, especially relation-
ships between men and women. In the best-known works, the depiction of society at large in its sociological, political, and historical aspects is not very much in evidence either; and nor is the transmission of pure ideas. Verne’s works are concerned with physical, material existence, or, more simply, the interaction between people and things. Virtually all of them are situated in a definite time and place, often far away, with the journey a central element.
Genre fiction has a poor reputation. By placing writer x in genre y, the assumption is sometimes that he or she deals with matters tangential to personal experience and hence to the real aims of literature. But such an assumption would seem to be based on a double misapprehension. Direct personal experience does not exist as such; and there is no simple re- counting in literature (or in life). Experience can only be talked about in relation to specific concerns, which normally imply some genre or anoth- er. To call Defoe an adventure writer, Swift a travel writer, the Brontës writers of sentimental fiction, or Shakespeare a crime and historical writ- er, may be true—but will shock, because we are accustomed to viewing great  literature  as  transcending  any  particular  pigeon-hole.  In  other words, a mistaken view holds literature to be genre-free and genre fiction to be literature-free.
In Verne’s case, if a genre classification really is necessary, he falls in- to that of travel and adventure. But in no case can he be considered a science fiction writer. One good reason is that only about a third of the Extraordinary Journeys really involve any science; and another, that de- spite his futuristic reputation the events recounted nearly always happen just before the present. What is more, the science is not generally innova- tive or designed to change society. A significant number of the works do depend on a novel form of transport, whether underground, under water, or in the air or beyond. But Verne prefers ‘intermediate technology’. His first vehicle is the balloon, invented long before he was writing, and which he in fact considered too high-tech, but the only way to get across Africa in 1862. His next four vehicles are foot- and raft-power in Journey to the Centre of the Earth and sailing-ship and dog-sled in the greatly underes- timated Adventures of Captain Hatteras. Even Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Seas is more about the ocean than submarines, more about Nemo than nuclear propulsion. Around the World in Eighty Days goes out of its way to avoid any technological extrapolation, reverting to elephants or wind-sled each time the railway fails.
The real thrust of Verne’s works, their raison d’être, is to explore the globe. All the Extraordinary Journeys in the Known and Unknown Worlds
(as Hetzel baptised them in 1866) deal with an ‘elsewhere’. Even Back-
wards into Britain is a voyage of discovery: Verne describes his excite- ment at the idea of a myth-laden Caledonia, where every hill and street is redolent with memories—an excitement specifically literary and historical. True, he prefers the ship to Liverpool to be propeller-driven; and the sce- ne where the train hurtles along the Scottish crags is most striking. But such enthusiasm at poetry in motion hardly makes him science-fiction.
Verne’s imagination works instead on an unusual sensitivity to the physical world, with the dimensions of space representing a constant in- terest (rarely ‘outer space’, but frequently ‘inner’). Modern criticism has found a very wide variety of innovative elements in his treatment of the globe. The ‘world-view’ conveyed includes, in brief summary: an anthro- pomorphisation of the Earth and a mechanisation of the human, with the biological often acting as a go-between; an attempt at sensual ‘totalisa- tion’, an exhaustive knowledge (in the biblical sense) of the world; a con- stant scepticism; the undermining by juxtaposition, humour, and irony of any dogmatic view of existence; a metaphorisation of everyday objects and ideas, which are then often re-metaphorised or even de- metaphorised; a distinctive rhythm, made up of repetitions, silences, mi- nor and major keys, counterpoint, and slow movements leading up to ex- plosive crescendos; and an innovative narrative technique, whether in the use of tense, person, point of view, voice, or structure.
Reading Verne nearly a century after his death, the abiding impression is that of a distinctive voice and a personal vision: of literary works that remain (or have become?) startlingly modern.
