One problem for a detailed analysis of Verne is the sheer volume of his production. Nevertheless, his non-posthumous work have often been divided into three periods. The first dozen novels are self-confident in tone and structure. The second period deals with less ‘prestigious’ territo- ries, and increasingly with social, political and historical issues, in novels like Mathias Sandorf (1885), set in the Mediterranean, or North against South (1887), about the American Civil War. The final period often comes back to ideas treated in the first, but in ironic, derisory, or negative fash- ion: Le Sphinx des glaces (1897), for instance, designed to be a sequel to Poe’s Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket, or Master of the World (1904), which makes the rebel Robur of The Clipper of the Clouds (1886) into a misogynist destroyer.
Verne’s imagination is fired by ‘one-offs’, by unique events. The Dark Continent, the poles, the interior of the Earth, the dark side of the moon and the bottom of the ocean were unexplored when he began writing. In each case a central point then represented a maximum of exoticism, an ultima  Thule,  further-than-which-it-was-not-possible-to-go.  But  each could only be done once. Even from the beginning, as a consequence, Verne’s travellers seem torn between a hasty extravagance and a thrifty reluctance: one eye on the efforts of real-life explorers and of the author’s competitors in the fiction business, the other on spinning the series out for as long as possible. Then, once all the possibilities have been exhaust- ed, all corners of the universe visited, the works ‘have nowhere to go’.
Such a view of the plots has more than an element of truth. But it must be conjugated with the real nature of invention in the Journeys. The travelling carries much more weight than the arriving. A constantly ex- pressed fear is that of a ‘fiasco’ on arrival in port; and hence a perpetual strategy, that of the most roundabout route—the ‘heroic’ method, as Li- denbrock puts it. Verne’s writing is essentially about maximising the po-
tential of the blank areas on or off the maps, those non-historical, non- geographical, and sometimes non-spatial domains where his imagination can be given full rein. In the later works his inventiveness turns back on itself and becomes in some ways more creative. One’s reaction to the dif- ferent phases of the Journeys is therefore ultimately a matter of individual taste.
But in any case one of the aims of exploring the universe is in reality the search for traces of the past, much more attractive to Verne than any
conceivable future. And clearly the exploration of the history of an indi-
vidual, a species or a world can be pursued almost indefinitely. Paradoxi- cally, only the past is open-ended.
The three-way division is not therefore clear-cut, and the transitions are particularly evasive. The ‘follow up’ to Journey to the Centre of the
Earth, The Child of the Cavern (1877), is perhaps the last novel where some ‘transcendent’ discovery seems probable, where access to a life-
giving mystery is at stake; but throughout the 1870s a mixture of an- guished and good-humoured works appeared, from Around the World in
Eighty Days (1872) via The Boy Captain (1879) to The Tribulations of a
Chinese Gentleman (1879). The first one is a journey-to-end-all-journeys, an effortless summum of all possible worldly travel—but is itself a repeti- tion, as Captain Grant’s Children (1865–7) had already gone round the world. The Mysterious Island (1874–5) is another culmination or cul-de- sac, for it is situated in the finite space of a small desert island.
It would be tempting, therefore, to say that 1875 must be approxi- mately when ‘something happened’. However this would be to ignore the
extraordinary The Chancellor, probably written in 1870. It was influenced
by the notorious events on the Raft of the Méduse, when over three- quarters of the people who abandoned ship in shallow waters off the west coast of Africa failed to survive. Perhaps also echoing the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1, Verne’s novel is a horrific story of man’s inhumanity to man, complete with murder and several varieties of cannibalism. It con- tains no science whatsoever; and precious little optimism. It is also a landmark in the history of French literature, being the first narrative novel to be written in the present tense—a clear sign of the breaking down of the old order.
Any tidy schema of Verne’s works is thus difficult to sustain. Two of the rare constants are the pessimism, incipient even in the early fiction, and the retreat into the past.
This is where Journey to the Centre of the Earth comes in, both as the second of the Journeys to be published and because of its theme of de-
scent into the most distant past.
We know very little about its inception. It was thought that there was no extant manuscript. However, in 1994 one was amazingly revealed to exist; but it is in private hands and no details have been published to date. Accordingly, this third reprint of the present volume contains un- published information about this important find (see pp. xxx-xxii and 231-
2). There are no surviving proofs, and virtually the only reference in the
