contemporary correspondence occurs in a letter of 12 April 1864. Since it is not mentioned in the contract of 1 January 1864, it was probably writ- ten between these two dates (the action of the novel itself runs up to March 1864 and beyond). At the time of writing, Verne was probably cor- recting the proofs of The Adventures of Captain Hatteras (hence the simi- larities: in each a liquid Ariadne’s thread leads to an electric, illuminated sea, representing a return to paradise, but one protected by a volcanic fire).
One of the strands common to all the early books is Scotland. Verne’s urge to go ever further north, abruptly curtailed after only three days in
the Highlands in Backwards to Britain, re-emerges in both the Journey
and Hatteras, each expedition being made to pass close to Scotland at least once. All three books confront the untamed wilderness, which for classically educated French people was northern barbarianism. In all three the harshness of life fits in with a reductionism, a misérabilisme, even a masochistic streak. All feature protagonists who structure their existence in terms of how far they have travelled. The bare Romantic landscapes in all three are suited to admiring the patterns of nature: an obsessively re- peated phrase is ‘criss-crossing meanders’. Linearity and networks, sen- sual curves and brutal straight lines, nature and artifice: this phrase, first used in describing railways in Liverpool, is perhaps emblematic of Verne’s view of existence.
The publishing history of the Journey indicates another concern, for this novel is unique among Verne’s in undergoing significant changes after publication in book form. Most of chapters 37–9 were added in the first large-octavo edition (1867). The reason for the insertion was undoubtedly developments in 1865 establishing prehistory as a major field of study. If the 1864 edition featured ancient sea-monsters, the new pages go much further. They present the perfectly preserved body of a human being amongst remains dating from the Quaternary Era—and, what is more, a white human being. But they also feature a living herd of mastodons, to- gether with an equally living herdsman: a 12-foot giant carrying a giant club. Although his existence is subsequently called into doubt, these chap- ters go well beyond the limits of plausibility Verne normally set himself.
Both in the new section and in the Journey as a whole, Verne drew from a wide range of sources, constructing a veritable meeting-place for
the most varied literary and scientific authors.
There may be some slight influence from Dante’s Inferno, the Iceland- ic legends about Hamlet (one of Shakespeare’s sources), Chateaubriand (for some of the Romantic language), and Baudelaire (‘To plunge to the chasm’s bottom, Heaven or Hell, what difference?’). But the text often in- dicates more direct influences. Most obvious are Virgil’s Et quacumque viam dederit fortuna, sequamur (ch. 11), facilis descensus Averni (ch. 18) and Immanis pecoris custos, immanior ipse! (ch. 39) (see Explanatory Notes for translations). If the ascription is explicit in the first two cases, it may not have been needed in the third for readers brought up on the classics. More generally, the early alchemists are acknowledged, and the
word Averni (‘the Underworld’) may indicate a source of inspiration in medieval ideas of an underground Hell.
An explicit reference is made to E. T. A. Hoffmann’s character ‘who lost his shadow’ (ch. 29), an important feature in the underground cavern
being the lack of shadows. But Hoffmann’s Mines of Falun also enthusias-
tically describes underground passages walled with mineral riches and sparkling crystals of strange-sounding substances, with striking similari- ties to Verne’s descriptions.
Verne quotes ‘a British captain’ (ch. 30) who thought that the Earth was ‘a vast hollow sphere, inside which the air was kept luminous by rea-
son of the great pressure, while two heavenly bodies, Pluto and Proserpi-
na, traced their mysterious orbits’. The Captain (of infantry) John Cleve Symmes was a real-life figure, in fact an American, and almost certainly the author of Symzonia (1820, under the pseudonym ‘Captain Adam Sea- born’). ‘Captain Synness’ is quoted in Capitaine Hatteras (ch. 24) as be- lieving that access to the centre of the Earth was possible via the Poles— and as having suggested such an expedition to the equally real-life scien- tists and explorers Davy, Humboldt, and Arago!
Edgar Allan Poe is perhaps the most important literary influence on the Journey. Verne published a long study of his works in April 1864, ana- lysing in particular ‘The Gold Bug’ and Arthur Gordon Pym. The borrow- ings from Poe in the Journey include the word-puzzle and its solution, the leper scene, the mummified body, the fear of cataracts, the vertigo pro- duced by ‘high places’ and the accompanying suicidal temptation—plus possibly the hurricane, the battle between the sea-monsters, and the
‘bone-graveyard’.
The Journey also shares material with Dumas’s Isaac Laquédem (1853). These include a retracing of man’s past, an underground descent that leads to gigantic monsters and shady forests, a discovery of animal bones,  volcanoes  described  with  a  similar  vocabulary  of  ‘bowels’,
‘mouths’, and ‘strata’, the idea of air becoming denser than mercury, a hollow globe with two planets lighting it, lessons in geology and palaen- tology, including ‘zoophytes’, hints at evolution, and so on. Some sort of connection between the two would seem indisputable.
There are also disturbing similarities with George Sand’s ‘Laura: Voy- age dans le cristal’ (January 1864). This tale presents a young German
