mineralogist, Alexis, who is in love with his cousin and dreams that he is
visiting the inside of a ‘geode’—a hollow stone covered in crystal—then that he is going to the North Pole, from where he explores the interior of the Earth. Significant parallels include a sailing from Kiel, a fall into a chasm, an uncle with a speech impediment and a quick temper, the in- creasing decisiveness of the hero, the lack of heat in the centre, difficult descents, and an encounter with prehistoric animals. Sand subsequently noted in her diary the uncanny resemblance. Both authors were published by Hetzel, were close friends of his, and had read Figuier, an expert on volcanoes. Both had also read Charles Edmond, a friend of Sand’s and the source of much of the voyage and the travel across Iceland in the Jour-
ney. However, Verne probably borrowed ideas directly from Sand, who must therefore be considered an important inspirating for the novel.
Verne was in addition sued for plagiarism by a Léon Delmas. Under the pseudonym René de Pont-Jest, he had published a short story called
‘La Tête de Mimers’ in the Revue contemporaine of September 1863. The
hero is similarly German; the document causing the journey is found in an old book; it is written in runic characters; and it is a shadow that indicates where to look. The affair dragged on until a court case in 1877, which Verne won: but the similarities remain disturbing.
Among more scientific works which contributed to the Journey are those of Élie de Beaumont and Charles Saint-Claire Deville, a friend of Verne’s who had visited the crater of Stromboli as a specialist in seismic phenomena, particularly intermittent volcanoes. Louis Figuier’s La Terre avant le déluge (1863) was a major source for many of the underground scenes. Boitard’s Paris avant les hommes (1863) has also been suggested for the prehistoric aspect; plus Ludvig Holberg’s Nicolai Klimii Iter Subter- raneum, novam telluris theoriam. . . (Copenhagen, 1741—translated as Nicolas Klimius dans le monde souterrain, 1741). This was subsequently republished in the same series as the anonymous Relation of a Journey from the  North  Pole to the South Pole via  the Centre of the World (1721)—and certainly influenced Poe’s ‘A Descent into the Maelstrom’. Poe also seemed to have drawn from it for the cataract ending of Arthur Gordon Pym.
What is common to many of the sources, in sum, is the medieval be- lief, not entirely dismissed in the nineteenth century, that the centre of
the Earth could be reached via huge openings at the poles. Poe acts as a
clearing-house for many of them; but Verne also seems to have drawn directly from a wide variety of literary and scientific sources, although he then reworked them into a coherent tale of his own.
The Journey has had in turn an influence on later writers. It has been explicitly borrowed from by the French writers Villiers de l’Isle Adam, Al- fred Jarry, and Boris Vian, but seems also to have influenced Mark Twain
(in Tom Sawyer), Arthur Conan Doyle (in The Lost World), possibly the
playwright Paul Claudel—and the surrealist painter André Delvaux, obses- sively. Much of the work of the contemporary French writer Michel Tour- nier is a homage to Verne, with one section of his key novel The Meteors constituting a sustained pastiche of the Journey—like all good pastiches, a respectful and sophisticated dissection and an exaggeration of some of the absurder sides to the tale.
Journey to the Centre of the Earth is unusual in its degree of escape from contemporary (and indeed historical) reality. Verne is here in his el- ement. He delights in the feel of subterranean existence, with imagina- tion, even dreams, playing an important role. His writing is volcanic.
But only three-fifths of the Journey actually takes place underground. Also, the ‘to’ of the title is misleading, for it is not clear whether one can even reach the centre. Verne works round the question of whether a great heat exists without ever answering it. Saknussemm claimed to have been
there (although not necessarily to have come back); but, as Axel points out, reliable ways of measuring depth underground had not been invented at the time. But, as Lidenbrock had remarked just before, one is weight- less at the centre, so .. . .
The whole story contains in fact many more mysteries, implausibili- ties, and ambivalences than Verne’s positivistic reputation allows. Quite
apart from the doubt attached to the scene of the mastodons and the gi-
ant herdsman, riding an eruption on a raft of wood, even if fossilised, can legitimately raise eyebrows. Even the route is not clear: the tunnel dis- covered in the great cavern probably starts from the other side of the Li- denbrock Sea, but the narrator repeatedly affirms the opposite.
Again, man’s past is riddled with unsolved problems. Did man arrive relatively late in the scheme of things, as had generally been recognised by mid-nineteenth century? Did the human bodies discovered in the inte- rior actually live there; and does this then re-establish man at the begin- nings (a) down there and/or (b) up here? If so, what sort of man: the most highly evolved, comparable to modern Europeans, in the racist views current at the time; or a giant, a relative of the first man; or else some intermediate being?
